TITLE: Beneficial Effects of Micronutrient Supplementation in Restoring the Altered Microbiota and Gut–Retina Axis in Patients with Neovascular Age-Related Macular Degeneration—A Randomized Clinical Trial
DOI: 10.3390/nu16223971
LINK: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/16/22/3971
DATA AVAILABILITY (to download the raw sequencing data): GSE261732

AUTHORS: Simone Baldi1, Giuditta Pagliai1, Leandro Di Gloria2, Marco Pallecchi3, Francesco Barca4, Benedetta Pieri4, Gianluca Bartolucci3, Matteo Ramazzotti2, Amedeo Amedei1,5, Gianna Palendri4, Francesco Sofi1,6

Affiliations:
1 Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
2 Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences “Mario Serio”, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
3 Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health NEUROFARBA, University of Florence, Florence, Italy
4 SOC of Ophthalmology, Palagi Hospital, USL Toscana Centro, Florence, Italy.
5 Network of Immunity in Infection, Malignancy and Autoimmunity (NIIMA), Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Florence, Italy
6 Unit of Clinical Nutrition, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy,

Introduction
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of visual impairment in the elderly, characterized by multifactorial etiology. Recent evidence suggests a potential involvement of the gut-retina axis in AMD pathogenesis, prompting exploration into novel therapeutic strategies. We investigated the effects of a prebiotic mix containing lutein, zeaxanthin, and saffron, recognized for their anti-inflammatory properties, on ophthalmological and microbial parameters in neovascular AMD (nAMD) patients.

Methods
Thirty nAMD subjects were randomized to receive daily prebiotic supplementation along with anti-VEGF therapy or anti-VEGF treatment alone for 6 months. Ophthalmological assessments, anthropometric and biochemical measurements and stool samples were obtained pre- and post-treatment. Gut microbiota (GM) characterization was performed through 16S rRNA sequencing while short (SCFAs), medium (MCFAs) and long (LCFAs) chain fatty acids were analyzed with a gas chromatography–mass spectrometry protocol.

Results 
nAMD patients exhibited reduced GM alpha diversity, altered taxonomic abundances and decreased total SCFA amount, coupled with elevated proinflammatory octanoic and nonanoic acids. Prebiotic supplementation led to improved visual acuity in comparison to the control group, along with the reduction in the total amount of MCFAs, metabolites exerting detrimental ocular effects.

Conclusions
This study reveals compositional and functional imbalances in the GM of nAMD patients compared to healthy controls. Furthermore, the lutein, zeaxanthin, and saffron-based prebiotic supplementation demonstrated a potential to restore the gut-retina axis, suggesting its therapeutic efficacy in improving ocular outcomes in nAMD patients. These findings underscore the intricate interplay between the GM and ocular health, offering insights into innovative interventions for AMD management.
