Title:
Deciphering the gut microbiota of very early systemic sclerosis (VEDOSS): the first
taxonomic and functional characterization

Fist name: Edda Russo

Objective: Gut microbiota (GM) plays role in systemic sclerosis (SSc). We compared the faecal
microbiota, its short-chain fatty acids - (SCFAs) and host free-fatty acids (FFAs) in patients with
very early SSc (VEDOSS) and established SSc.

Methods: 26 SSc and 18 VEDOSS patients, as well as 20 healthy controls (HC), were enrolled.
Stool samples were collected. GM was assessed through 16S rRNA sequencing. FFA were
evaluated through gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.

Results: VEDOSS patients showed increased abundance of Bacteroidales and Oscillospirales
orders, and decreased abundances of Bacilli class, Blautia, Romboutsia, Streptococcus, and
Turicibacter genera compared to HC. SSc patients exhibited elevated Acidaminococcaceae and
Sutterellaceae families, along with decreased Peptostreptococcaceae family and Anaerostipes,
Blautia, Romboutsia, and Turicibacter genera compared to HC. Both SSc and VEDOSS patients
had lower butyrate and higher acetate than HC. VEDOSS demonstrated also an increase in
Oscillospiraceae family and Anaerostipes genus, and a decrease in Alphaproteobacteria class, and
Lactobacillales order compared to SSc. VEDOSS patients exhibited higher acetate and lower
valerate.

Conclusions: For the first time in VEDOSS patients, we identified gut microbiota (GM) dysbiosis
marked by depletion of beneficial anti-inflammatory bacteria, especially those producing butyrate.
Accordingly, we evidenced a significant decrease in fecal butyrate. This early
GM imbalance may contribute to the growth of inflammatory microbes, worsening intestinal
dysbiosis and inflammation in the starting stages of SSc. Our findings foster the potential for
investigating butyrate administration in early disease phases as a novel therapeutic approach to
mitigate disease progression and symptoms, thereby enhancing patient quality of life.
