Title: 
Evaluation of biomass conservation impact on wastewater-treating microbial communities using 16S rRNA gene sequencing

Authors:
Leandro Di Gloria, Jan Pietro Czellnik, Serena Falcioni, Caterina Senesi, Alex Ricoveri, Lorenzo Casbarra, Cecilia Polizzi, Riccardo Campo, Tommaso Lotti, Giulio Munz, Matteo Ramazzotti

Abstract:
Immediate DNA extraction from microbial communities upon sample collection is not always feasible. 
Consequently, numerous studies have investigated the effects of storage on biomass composition, yet no clear consensus has been reached.
Furthermore, these studies have primarily focused on human-associated tissues or soils. 
In this paper, we tested the storage-induced biases in the case of flocs from activated sludge tank and granules from aerobic granular sludge reactors prior to 16S rRNA sequencing. 
Different storage temperatures (4 °C, −20 °C, −80 °C) and durations (up to 3 years), as well as the use of glycerol as cryo-protectant, were evaluated. 
Briefly, thawing primarily affected the most abundant community members, as expected, but detectable losses were also observed in less abundant yet relevant taxa. 
Nevertheless, in most cases overall community profiles remained consistent enough to prevent sample misidentification, even under the least favourable storage conditions. 
Moreover, glycerol addition did not always resulted beneficial.

Data availability:
The raw sequencing data of the samples analysed in this study is publicly available on the NCBI SRA under the accession codes:
PRJNA1348104 (AS samples);
PRJNA1311054 (SUB15726594, pilot AGS samples) 
and PRJNA1348129 (PN-AGS samples).

Fundings:
This project has received funding from 
A) the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 872053, “RISE-RECYCLES” project 
and B) European Union’s - NextGeneration EU PRIN 2022, “Integrating innovative N-removing biofilm processes and excess sludge valorization technologies for the development of energy- and material-efficient wastewater treatment plants (N4En)” project. 

